JUDY WOODRUFF: Now to the
release of Otto Warmbier from
captivity in North Korea.
The American college student
was arrested almost 18 months
ago during a trip to the
reclusive nation, and he was
sentenced to 15 years in prison.
This morning came word suddenly
that the United States had
secured his release, but under
apparently desperate
circumstances.
Warmbier is comatose,
and has been for a year.
An American delegation in
Pyongyang petitioned for his
immediate release yesterday.
Our chief foreign
affairs correspondent,
Margaret Warner, reports.
REX TILLERSON, U.S. Secretary
of State: At the president's
direction, the Department
of State has secured
the release of Otto
Warmbier from North Korea.
MARGARET WARNER: The
announcement came from
Secretary of State Rex
Tillerson at a Senate
budget hearing.
The 22-year-old University of
Virginia student was finally
free, after being jailed by the
North's repressive
regime for 17 months.
Anna Fifield has been
reporting the story for
The Washington Post.
She spoke via Skype from Tokyo.
ANNA FIFIELD, The Washington
Post: What I have been told
is that, last Monday, June
the 5th, the North Koreans
actually approached Americans
who they talk to, and they said
that Otto Warmbier was in
a coma and had been in a
coma for more than a year.
And that started the
ball rolling to have
him medically evacuated.
The North Koreans said
that he came down with
a case of botulism soon
after his sentencing,
and that he was given a sleeping
pill and fell into a coma,
and he didn't wake up from
that.
MARGARET WARNER: Warmbier's
parents confirmed their
son is in a coma, and
had been medically
evacuated.
In a statement to the Associated
Press, they also said: "We
want the world to know how
we and our son have been
brutalized and terrorized
by the pariah regime."
Warmbier was arrested
after he allegedly took
a propaganda poster from
the wall of a Pyongyang
hotel on New Year's Eve, 2015.
He'd been in North Korea
as part of a tour group.
In March last year,
he was sentenced to
15 years hard labor.
OTTO WARMBIER, Released North
Korean Prison: I have made
the worst mistake of my life.
MARGARET WARNER: In the past,
Pyongyang has used detained
American citizens to try to
exert leverage over the U.S.
But Anna Fifield says, this
time, the North had appeared
unwilling to bargain.
It didn't respond to U.S. offers
to send a high-level envoy
to discuss Warmbier and three
other Americans
held by the North.
One was arrested
just last month.
Pyongyang's attitude
changed in May.
It agreed to let Swedish
diplomats visit the prisoners,
and with news of Warmbier's dire
condition, Pyongyang urgently
requested a meeting with a
top U.S. official at the U.N.
last week.
At that point, Fifield said,
President Trump got involved.
ANNA FIFIELD: Once Otto
Warmbier's condition was known,
I'm told that the president did
become involved, that he was
informed, that he personally
gave the order to do everything
that they could to
get Otto Warmbier out.
MARGARET WARNER: The release
comes at a time of heightened
tensions between Washington
and the regime of Kim Jong-un.
Pyongyang has ramped up its
nuclear and missile programs.
In response, the U.S. has taken
a tough tack, and recently
began deploying the advanced
anti-missile defense known
as THAAD to South Korea.
But Fifield says another
motivation may have
driven the North Koreans.
ANNA FIFIELD: I think the North
Koreans have probably realized
that they did need to get
rid of Otto Warmbier
at some stage, that he
wasn't recovering, and
they needed to hand
him back.
MARGARET WARNER: The release
also coincides with former NBA
player Dennis Rodman's latest
visit to Pyongyang.
Fifield says she was told
Rodman's visit had nothing to
with the freeing of Warmbier.
Warmbier was flown first
to an American military
medical facility in
Japan, then flown on to
Cincinnati, near
his family's home.
For the "PBS NewsHour,"
I'm Margaret Warner.